Timed Up and Go (TUG) Test
1,2
1. Equipment: arm chair, tape measure, tape, stop watch.
2. Begin the test with the subject sitting correctly in a chair with arms, the subject’s
back should resting on the back of the chair. The chair should be stableand positioned
such that it will not move when the subject moves from sitting to standing.
3. Place a piece of tape or other marker on the floor 3 meters away from the chair so
that it is easily seen by the subject.
4. Instructions : “On the word GO you will stand up, walk to the line on the floor, turn
around and walk back to the chair and sit down. Walk at your regular pace.
5. Start timing on the word “GO” and stop timing when the subject is seated again
correctly in the chair with their back resting on the back of the chair.
6. The subject wears their regular footwear, may use any gait aid that they normally
use during ambulation, but may not be assisted by another person. There is no time
limit. They may stop and rest (but not sit down) if they need to.
7. Normal healthy elderly usually complete the task in ten seconds or less. Very
frail or weak elderly with poor mobility may take 2 minutes or more.
8. The subject should be given a practice trial that is not timed before testing.
9. Results correlate with gait speed, balance, functional level,the ability to go out, and
can follow change over time.
10. Interpretation < 10 seconds = normal
< 20 seconds = good mobility, can go out alone, mobile without a
gait aid.
< 30 seconds = problems, cannot go outside alone, requires a gait
aid.
A score of more than or equal to fourteen seconds has been shown to indicate high risk
of falls.
1. Podsiadlo D, Richardson S. The Time “Up & Go”: A Test of Basic Functional Mobility for Frail Elderly Persons. Journal of the American Geriatrics
Society 1991; 39(2): 142­148
2. Shumway ­ Cook A, Brauer S, Woollacott M. Predicting the Probability for Falls in Community­Dwelling Older Adults Using the Timed Up & Go Test.
Physical Therapy 2000 Vol 80(9): 896­903.
Saskatoon Falls Prevention Consortium, Falls Screening and Referral Algorithm, TUG, Saskatoon Falls Prevention consortium, June, 2005