HHS4867 Functional Movement Science
 Learning Objectives
By the end of this lecture, students will be able to
understand and to perform:
⚫ Bed mobility & Transfer activities
⚫ Assisting ambulation with aids
Ambulation & Transfer
I. Bed mobility
⚫ Mobility activities are used to adjust recumbent patient’s body position, they may
be performed:
- Independently by patient
- With assistance from other person
- By use of various type of equipment
⚫ Common types of bed mobility:
- Bridging
- Moving across the bed (supine)
- Upward / downward movement (supine)
- Supine to side-lying
Bridging (both leg or single leg)
1. Patient assumes crook lying position with the elbow flexed to about 90°°, feet flat on bed
2. Patient presses down firmly with the elbows and head
3. Patient arches his back and push down with the lower limb(s), raises the pelvis slightly
clear of the supporting surface
3.1. Assists patient by lifting his pelvis up with both hands
Moving across the bed
1. Similar as bridging with patients’ hands slightly away from the sides
2. After patient raises the pelvis up and moves it sideways in the required direction
3. Patient then lowers the pelvis onto the bed, allows the legs to straighten outHHS4867 Functional Movement Science
3.1. Adjusts the alignment of patient’s upper trunk and head
Upward movement
1. Similar as bridging with hip & knee fully flexed, feet flat on the bed with heels close to
the buttocks
2. Patient performs bridging by lifting up pelvis & upper trunk, and moves upward by
simultaneously pushing into the bed with LL and elbow
2.1. Assists patient by lifting up his pelvis and move towards the head of the bed
Downward movement
1. Similar as upward movement but with hip & knee partially flexed, feet flat on the bed
with heels away from buttocks
2. Similar as step 2 in Upward movement, patient moves downward by pulling with the LL
2.1. Assists patient by lifting up his pelvis and moves downward
Supine to Side lying (e.g. to left side lying)
1. Performs bridging and moves across the bed to right side
2. Keep right hip & knee bend, straighten the left leg
3. Left hand grasps the side of the bed with arm slightly abducted
4. Simultaneous movement of head turning to left, right arm swing across the chest and a
firm thrust from the right foot => rotate the whole trunk and pelvis to the left
4.1. Assists patient by pulling gently on the left posterior scapula (shoulder) and left
posterior pelvis
II. Transfer
⚫ Basically 2 types of transfer
- Standing transfer means the patient stands during the transfer with / without
assistant
- Sitting transfer means the patient is sitting throughout the transfer e.g.
mechanical life is used
⚫ The level of assistance during transfer depends on patient’s:
- Condition e.g. paralysis, amputation, hip surgery
- Strength, endurance, and balance which may be affected by:
◦ Patient’s physique & mental condition
◦ Respiratory disease e.g. COPD
◦ Cardiac disease e.g. congestive heart failure
◦ Neurological disease e.g. CVA, Parkinson disease
◦ Weight bearing status e.g. NWB, PWB, FWBHHS4867 Functional Movement Science
⚫ Common types of transfer:
- Lying to sitting / sitting to lying
- Sitting to standing / Standing to sitting
- Bed to chair / Chair to bed
◦ Usually a good side approach will be adopted for pivoting with better
stability
⚫ Special precautions – Total hip replacement (THR) / Austin Moore Arthroplasty
(AMA)
- Mostly posterolateral surgical approach will be used, the new prosthetic hip
should be protected from dislocation (Vulnerable position: Hip Flexion +
Adduction + Internal Rotation)
- When assisting patient transfer especially when lying  sitting, bad side
approach will be adopted
 Avoid hip flexion > 90°°
 Avoid hip adduction and internal rotation
Lying to Sitting (Fig. 1)
⚫ Assume patient has left hemiplegia (i.e. left side weakness)
1. Follow the procedures as (supine to s.ly) to roll to a left side-lying position
2. Flexes hips and knees
2.1. Assists patient by bending his legs
3. Instruct patient to push with the stronger right arm (and to push with the left elbow, if
s/he can move her hemiplegic arm) so she comes to an upright position
3.1. Assists patient by placing one arm under his/her shoulder (not the neck) and one arm
over around the knees. Raise the patient’s upper body at the same time moving the legs
off the bed
4. Have the patient sit safely over the edge of the bed
⚫ The patient can return to a supine position by performing the movements in reverse
sequence
⚫ This technique is also beneficial for patients with low back dysfunction as less strain is
directed to the lumbar spineHHS4867 Functional Movement Science
Fig. 1 Assisting patient transfers from lying to sitting
Sitting to Standing
1. Instruct patient to sit forward by sliding his/her buttock towards the edge of the seat until
his/her feet are under the knees
2. Instruct patient to lean trunk forward
 Step 1 & 2 brings the patients’ center of gravity within the base of support when standing
up
 Breaking down the steps is especially important for neurological patient
3. Instruct patient to slowly stand up by straightening (extending) hip & knee, and hand(s)
pushing against the armrest / bed simultaneously
3.1. Assists patient by placing one arm over his/her back to facilitate the trunk forward
leaning, another hand lifting the gait belt while patient is standing up
3.2. Avoid thrusting maneuver
Bed to wheelchair (stand block pivot) (Fig. 2)
⚫ Assume patient has left hemiplegia
1. Have patient sit over the edge of the bed
2. Position the wheelchair to the patient’s right side at an angle ~ 45-60° to the bed, remove
the near side armrest, swing away (or detach) the footrest, lock the brakes of the
wheelchair
3. Help the patient to stand following the step 1-3 as in sitting ≒standing, then pivot to the
right side and slowly sit down onto the wheelchair
3.1. Assists patient to stand and pivot by bracing the patient’s knees with your legs
3.2. Grasp the gait belt and gently lift the patient while pivotingHHS4867 Functional Movement Science
Fig. 2 Bed to wheelchair, from lying position to sitting on wheelchairHHS4867 Functional Movement Science
III. Wheelchair
⚫ Basie types of wheelchair: transit, manual, electrical
⚫ Patient with inability to ambulate (e.g. spinal cord injury) or with poor endurance
***Remarks***
• Forward/ Backward/ Change direction
• Up & down curb
• Up & down slope
• Safety check: break, safety belt, limbs of patient, body
mechanics
IV. Types of ambulatory aids
⚫ Basic process of walking with aids:
1. Move walking aid forward
2. Move affected leg forward
3. (+/- Bear weight through hands) Step through with the unaffected leg
4. Guard for safety and repeatHHS4867 Functional Movement Science
Walker (Frame & rollators)
⚫ Walkers are used when maximal patient stability and support and are required
⚫ Impossible to use on stairs
⚫ May alter normal gait pattern; Rollator can facilitate the gait pattern for patients with
Parkinson disease
Axillary crutches & elbow crutches & gutter crutch
⚫ Provide less stability than walker
⚫ Can be used on stairs
⚫ Require good standing balance and body strength
⚫ Gutter crutch can be used for patient who cannot bear weight through the wrist and hand
4-point – FWB
2-point – FWB
3-point – NWB
Modified 3-point – PWB/FWBHAS4867 Functional Movement Science
Cane (Quadripod, tripod & stick)
⚫ Not for NWB or PWB
⚫ Can be used for impaired balance (e.g. stroke) or to improve stability by providing a wider
base of support during ambulation
V. Transfer with Assistive Aids
Sit to stand
Axillary crutches & elbow crutches
Modified 4-point – FWB
Modified 2-point - FWBHAS4867 Functional Movement Science
VI. Ambulation Patterns with Assistive Aids
4-point
⚫ Assistive aid and opposite lower extremity (LL) advance alternately
⚫ Bilateral stick, crutches, or reciprocal walker may be used
2-point
⚫ Assistive aid and opposite LL advance simultaneously
⚫ Bilateral stick, crutches, or reciprocal walker may be used
3-point
⚫ Assistive aid advances simultaneously with the NWB LL; then the FWB LL steps through
the aids
⚫ Bilateral crutches or frame may be used
3-1-point
⚫ Assistive aid and PWB LL advance simultaneously; then the FWB LL steps through the
aids
⚫ Bilateral crutches or frame may be used
Modified 4-point (Fig. 3)
⚫ Only one assistive aid is used
⚫ The assistive aid and the opposite LL advance alternately
⚫ The assistive aid is held in the hand opposite to the affected LL
Modified 2-point (Fig. 3)
⚫ Only one assistive aid is used
⚫ The assistive aid and the opposite LL advance simultaneously
⚫ The assistive aid is held in the hand opposite to the affected LL
Fig. 3 Modified 3-point gait (left) and modified 2-point gait (right)
*Students should refer to textbooks and references for details*HAS4867 Functional Movement Science
 References
1. Clarkson, H.M. (2012) Musculoskeletal Assessment. Joint Motion and Muscle Testing,
(3rd
ed.). Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
2. Hamill, J., & Knutzen, K.M. (2009) Biomechanical basis of human movement (3rd
ed.). Philadelphia : Wolters Kluwer Health/Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
3. Kendall, F.P., McCreary, E.K., Provance, P.G., Rodgers, M.M., & Romani, W.A.
(2005)
Muscles: Testing and Function, with Posture and Pain (5th
ed.). Baltimore: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins.
4. Pierson, F.M., Fairchild, S.L. (2008). Principles & Techniques of Patient Care (4th
ed.). Missouri: Saunders Elsevier.